 nike, inc. is an american multinational corporation that is engaged in the design, development and worldwide marketing and selling of footwear, apparel, equipment, accessories and services. the company is headquartered near beaverton, oregon, in the portland metropolitan area, and is one of only two fortune 500 companies headquartered in oregon. it is one of the world's largest suppliers of athletic shoes and apparel and a major manufacturer of sports equipment, with revenue in excess of us$24.1 billion in its fiscal year 2012 (ending may 31, 2012). as of 2012, it employed more than 44,000 people worldwide. the brand alone is valued at $10.7 billion making it the most valuable brand among sports businesses.the company was founded on january 25, 1964 as blue ribbon sports by bill bowerman and phil knight, and officially became nike, inc. on may 30, 1978. the company takes its name from nike, the greek goddess of victory. nike markets its products under its own brand, as well as nike golf, nike pro, nike+, air jordan, nike skateboarding, and subsidiaries including cole haan, hurley international, umbro and converse. nike also owned bauer hockey (later renamed nike bauer) between 1995 and 2008. in addition to manufacturing sportswear and equipment, the company operates retail stores under the niketown name. nike sponsors many high-profile athletes and sports teams around the world, with the highly recognized trademarks of "just do it" and the swoosh logo. nike, originally known as blue ribbon sports (brs), was founded by university of oregon track athlete philip knight and his coach bill bowerman in january 1964. the company initially operated as a distributor for japanese shoe maker onitsuka tiger (now asics), making most sales at track meets out of knight's automobile.according to otis davis, a student athlete whom bowerman coached at the university of oregon, who later went on to win two gold medals at the 1960 summer olympics, bowerman made the first pair of nike shoes for him, contradicting a claim that they were made for phil knight. says davis, "i told tom brokaw that i was the first. i don't care what all the billionaires say. bill bowerman made the first pair of shoes for me. people don't believe me. in fact, i didn't like the way they felt on my feet. there was no support and they were too tight. but i saw bowerman make them from the waffle iron, and they were mine."in 1964, in its first year in business, brs sold 1,300 pairs of japanese running shoes grossing $8,000. by 1965 the fledgling company had acquired a full-time employee and sales had reached $20,000. in 1966, brs opened its first retail store, located at 3107 pico boulevard in santa monica, california next to a beauty salon, so its employees no longer needed to sell inventory from the back of their cars. in 1967, due to rapidly increasing sales, brs expanded retail and distribution operations on the east coast, in wellesley, massachusetts.by 1971, the relationship between brs and onitsuka tiger was nearing an end. brs prepared to launch its own line of footwear, which would bear the swoosh newly designed by carolyn davidson. the swoosh was first used by nike on june 18, 1971, and was registered with the u.s. patent and trademark office on january 22, 1974.in 1976, the company hired john brown and partners, based in seattle, as its first advertising agency. the following year, the agency created the first "brand ad" for nike, called "there is no finish line," in which no nike product was shown. by 1980, nike had attained a 50% market share in the u.s. athletic shoe market, and the company went public in december of that year.together, nike and wieden+kennedy have created many print and television advertisements, and wieden+kennedy remains nike's primary ad agency. it was agency co-founder dan wieden who coined the now-famous slogan "just do it" for a 1988 nike ad campaign, which was chosen by advertising age as one of the top five ad slogans of the 20th century and enshrined in the smithsonian institution. walt stack was featured in nike's first "just do it" advertisement, which debuted on july 1, 1988. wieden credits the inspiration for the slogan to "let’s do it," the last words spoken by gary gilmore before he was executed. throughout the 1980s, nike expanded its product line to encompass many sports and regions throughout the world. in 1990, nike moved into its eight-building world headquarters campus in beaverton, oregon. nike produces a wide range of sports equipment. their first products were track running shoes. they currently also make shoes, jerseys, shorts, baselayers, etc. for a wide range of sports, including track and field, baseball, ice hockey, tennis, association football (soccer), lacrosse, basketball, and cricket. nike air max is a line of shoes first released by nike, inc. in 1987. the most recent additions to their line are the nike 6.0, nike nyx, and nike sb shoes, designed for skateboarding. nike has recently introduced cricket shoes called air zoom yorker, designed to be 30% lighter than their competitors'. in 2008, nike introduced the air jordan xx3, a high-performance basketball shoe designed with the environment in mind. nike sells an assortment of products, including shoes and apparel for sports activities like association football, basketball, running, combat sports, tennis, american football, athletics, golf, and cross training for men, women, and children. nike also sells shoes for outdoor activities such as tennis, golf, skateboarding, association football, baseball, american football, cycling, volleyball, wrestling, cheerleading, aquatic activities, auto racing, and other athletic and recreational uses. nike is well known and popular in youth culture, chav culture and hip hop culture for their supplying of urban fashion clothing. nike recently teamed up with apple inc. to produce the nike+ product that monitors a runner's performance via a radio device in the shoe that links to the ipod nano. while the product generates useful statistics, it has been criticized by researchers who were able to identify users' rfid devices from 60 feet (18 m) away using small, concealable intelligence motes in a wireless sensor network. in 2004, nike launched the sparq training program/division. some of nike's newest shoes contain flywire and lunarlite foam to reduce weight. on july 15, 2009, the nike+ sports band was released in stores. the product records distance run and calories expended, keeps time, and also gives runners new programs online they could try running. the 2010 nike pro combat jersey collection were worn by teams from the following universities: miami, alabama, boise state university, florida, ohio state, oregon state university, texas christian university, virginia tech, west virginia, and pittsburgh. teams will wear these jerseys in key matchups as well as any time the athletic department deems it necessary. nike has contracted with more than 700 shops around the world and has offices located in 45 countries outside the united states. most of the factories are located in asia, including indonesia, china, taiwan, india, thailand, vietnam, pakistan, philippines, and malaysia. nike is hesitant to disclose information about the contract companies it works with. however, due to harsh criticism from some organizations like corpwatch, nike has disclosed information about its contract factories in its corporate governance report. nike has been criticized for contracting with factories (known as nike sweatshops) in countries such as china, vietnam, indonesia and mexico. vietnam labor watch, an activist group, has documented that factories contracted by nike have violated minimum wage and overtime laws in vietnam as late as 1996, although nike claims that this practice has been stopped. the company has been subject to much critical coverage of the often poor working conditions and exploitation of cheap overseas labor employed in the free trade zones where their goods are typically manufactured. sources for this criticism include naomi klein's book no logo and michael moore documentaries. during the 1990s, nike faced criticism for the use of child labor in cambodia and pakistan in factories it contracted to manufacture soccer balls. although nike took action to curb or at least reduce the practice, they continue to contract their production to companies that operate in areas where inadequate regulation and monitoring make it hard to ensure that child labor is not being used. in 2001, a bbc documentary uncovered occurrences of child labor and poor working conditions in a cambodian factory used by nike. the documentary focused on six girls, who all worked seven days a week, often 16 hours a day. campaigns have been taken up by many colleges and universities, especially anti-globalisation groups, as well as several anti-sweatshop groups such as the united students against sweatshops. as of july 2011, nike stated that two-thirds of its factories producing converse products still do not meet the company's standards for worker treatment. a july 2011 associated press article stated that employees at the company's plants in indonesia reported constant abuse from supervisors. according to the new england-based environmental organization clean air-cool planet, nike ranks among the top three companies (out of 56) in a survey of climate-friendly companies. nike has also been praised for its nike grind program (which closes the product lifecycle) by groups like climate counts. one campaign that nike began for earth day 2008 was a commercial that featured basketball star steve nash wearing nike's trash talk shoe, which had been constructed in february 2008 from pieces of leather and synthetic leather waste from factory floors. the trash talk shoe also featured a sole composed of ground-up rubber from a shoe recycling program. nike claims this is the first performance basketball shoe that has been created from manufacturing waste, but it only produced 5,000 pairs for sale. another project nike has begun is called nike's reuse-a-shoe program. this program, started in 1993, is nike's longest-running program that benefits both the environment and the community by collecting old athletic shoes of any type in order to process and recycle them. the material that is produced is then used to help create sports surfaces such as basketball courts, running tracks, and playgrounds. a project through the university of north carolina at chapel hill found workers were exposed to toxic isocyanates and other chemicals in footwear factories in thailand. in addition to inhalation, dermal exposure was the biggest problem found. this could result in allergic reactions including asthmatic reactions. nike pays top athletes in many sports to use their products and promote and advertise their technology and design. nike's first professional athlete endorser was romanian tennis player ilie nastase. the first track endorser was distance runner steve prefontaine. prefontaine was the prized pupil of the company's co-founder, bill bowerman, while he coached at the university of oregon. today, the steve prefontaine building is named in his honor at nike's corporate headquarters. nike has also sponsored many other successful track and field athletes over the years, such as carl lewis, jackie joyner-kersee and sebastian coe. the signing of basketball player michael jordan in 1984, with his subsequent promotion of nike over the course of his career, with spike lee as mars blackmon, proved to be one of the biggest boosts to nike's publicity and sales. nike was the official kit sponsor for the indian cricket team for five years, from 2006 until the end of 2010. nike is a major sponsor of the athletic programs at penn state university and named its first child care facility after joe paterno when it opened in 1990 at the company's headquarters. nike originally announced it would not remove paterno's name from the building in the wake of the penn state sex abuse scandal. after the freeh report was released on july 12, 2012, nike ceo mark parker announced the name joe paterno would be removed immediately from the child development center. a new name has yet to be announced.nike also sponsored soccer players such as ronaldo, cristiano ronaldo, didier drogba, zlatan ibrahimovic, mario balotelli, wesley sneijder, wayne rooney, landon donovan among others.in january 2013 nike signed rory mcilroy, the then no 1 golfer in the world to a 10-year sponsorship deal worth $250 million. the deal includes using nike's range of golf clubs, a move nick faldo previously described as "dangerous" for mcilroy's game.on february 21, 2013, nike announced it suspended its contract with oscar pistorius, due to his being charged with premeditated murder.